---
title: "Hugo pages using themes as submodules"
date: 2022-08-07
draft: false
author: "Mariel"
tags:
  - geeking in
  - hugo
  - en
image: /images/ubuntu_vscode.png
description: "Discovering subtleties of Hugo"
toc: true
---

This GitHub page uses a Hugo. Specifically, it uses the 
[hugo-profile](https://github.com/gurusabarish/hugo-profile) theme. When I 
created this page, I did it from my Windows dev environment and it was all fine. 
But after cloning the page repository on my Linux environment, I never thought
I would learn more about Git :smile:
<!--more-->

If you are unfamiliar with Hugo, Hugo is a static site generator that has lots 
of momentum among developers and tech-savvy blog creators. I personally prefer 
it as I found the documentation and installation to be more straightforward than
Jekyll. 

Last month I cloned my page repository on my Linux dev environment and I tried 
to build the site. However, running `hugo server` would simply not work at all. 
I thought I may have made a mistake with the installation as I am also learning
Linux. 

This is the error I came across:

```
WARN 2022/07/28 22:11:00 found no layout file for "HTML" for "page": You should 
create a template file which matches Hugo Layouts Lookup Rules for this 
combination.
```

This warning is complaining about missing template files. I was confused, as I 
already had this site working on my Windows dev environment. 

Let's revise the typical Hugo folder structure. 

```
hugo_site
|--- config.yaml
|--- archetypes
|--- content
|--- data
|--- layouts
|--- static
|--- themes
```

Under the `themes` folder, you would find a folder that contains the theme used 
by the site. Themes can be downloaded directly to this location, or as many
theme creators and Hugo tutorials show, themes are added as git submodules!

What does this mean in practical terms? It means that the theme needs to be 
downloaded again! :boom:

I still consider myself a noob with git and Hugo, yet when I started to manually 
inspect the site folders, I came across that the `hugo-profile` folder was empty.
Why?

As far as I read on the git documentation, a submodule is a way to keep theme 
dependencies tidy, as the submodule is a record to a **specific commit** of a 
repository. The official Hugo tutorial walks new users through a site creation 
using the Ananke theme on their [Quick star guide](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/quick-start/#step-3-add-a-theme) using git submodules. Many theme creators 
follow this practice on their theme installation guides.

This being said, by cloning the page repo with the theme being a submodule, the 
clone operation does download this reference, but it does not download the 
external repository content! 

To solve this, I had to run the following commands:

```bash
$ git submodule init
$ git submodule update
```

After that, the theme folder got populated with the theme files and Hugo could
finally build the site. Since it's only me working on my personal site, it's 
alright to go through these steps everytime I clone my repo, but for larger
collaborative teams, it may be painful.

Never a dull day here :wink: