---
title: "The path to Linux via Ubuntu MATE"
date: 2022-07-26
draft: false
author: "Mariel"
tags:
  - linux
  - en
image: /images/ubuntu_vscode.png
description: "Exploring Ubuntu"
toc: true
---

So this is me updating this blog from my Linux machine. It's an old laptop from 
around 2014 that I bought for finishing my bachelor's thesis. So far so good,
yet not quite the same as doing this from Windows. It's been a fun adventure.
<!--more-->

You may ask, why is this woman learning Linux? Well, it has been a pending
assignment since I was in high school! I remember the early days of Canonical in
the mid 2000's and how they had the ShipIt program for sending the official
installation CD anywhere in the world. I still have an old CD that I ordered 
from those days. Yet, I never learned how to properly use Linux since nobody 
really encouraged me to break the only computer, which was shared with my 
brother and dad in the house :rofl: Sadly, I never came back to it, until this 
year. 

## Installing Linux on a reluctant laptop

These months I've been taking a slower work pace and enjoying my time with 
family while working on few independent projects which keep me mentally 
stimulated yet not stressed nor extra busy. This was the time to finally install  
Linux. 

My old laptop specs are not so bad for a computer that is circa 8 years old. 
It's an ASUS with an Intel Core i5 processor (quad-core), 6 GB RAM, no fancy
graphic card, one HDD with a 200 GB partition that I have reserved for my Linux
experiments. 

Considering these specs, my Linux beginner skills and my advanced skill in 
breaking things, I went for a user-friendly distribution... Ubuntu. Yet, after
reading about the different desktops available, I settled for the **Ubuntu MATE** 
flavour as this desktop choice will constrain less my laptop.

Did I mention that my laptop is ASUS? I faced some difficulties to install 
Ubuntu in the beginning. The laptop has Windows 10 installed and it would never
allow the Ubuntu installer to use the existing Windows partition. I actually 
wanted to get rid of Windows completely, but their UEFI nightmare wouldn't allow 
me to do so. The Ubuntu installer would simply "not see" any partition and so it 
never continued beyond the "Updates and more software" part.

So I created an empty partition of 200 GB for installing Ubuntu. That was the 
"solution" to my headache and here we are Ubuntu. 

## Development environment

Being a geek myself, my idea of getting familiar with new things and having fun
is to program and -most likely- break some things on the way. I needed to set up 
everything a programmer needs for doing such honourable deeds!

- VSCode, as my code editor
- nqq, as a text editor for quick file inspections
- Anaconda as my Python distr... hold it! :bangbang: Ubuntu comes with Python
installed by default. Still, I installed Anaconda, for the banter.
- Hugo, of course.
- VLC, you know... music is a must

Despite that this computer does not have an SSD, while my Windows laptop does 
enjoy from it and 16 GB RAM, I can't "see" any significant difference.

## Missions to achieve and takeaways

The idea is to learn Linux while programming in a different environment. The 
languages and tools are, so far:

- Java, for a project that hopefully will line up shortly
- Docker, I came across containers last year with the CReDo project. High time 
to dive into it
- Web development, why not?

If you ask, I have already broken things on the way (e.g. installing openJDK and 
messing up with Hugo installers :rofl:), but those "Lessons learned" will come
in later posts.