---
title: "Java strikes back!"
date: 2022-07-29
draft: false
author: "Mariel"
tags:
  - java
  - linux
  - en
image: /images/java_music.png
description: "Adventures learning Java"
toc: true
---

Java was supposed to be the first programming language I would learn. I remember
it was around 2013 when I had the idea about learning how to program. As a good
newbie, I downloaded the official Java development kit (JDK) and then... I never
really got around it, until now **2022**
<!--more-->

## Background
Here's a bit of history between Java and me. Well, me from 2013. My computer
was a student laptop, a simple but sturdy Dell Inspiron 1545. I installed all 
the typical chemical engineering student software, i.e. Office, Maple, Mathcad, 
Polymath, MATLAB, Hysys and one heat exchanger simulator. Now that I'm writing 
down all the stuff I had in that laptop, I think it was a superb computer. 

At some point in 2013, I was working on my bachelor's thesis and I thought I 
could start learning a programming languagem. I remember reading that Java was a 
good language to start, and so I downloaded JDK. This is when my loyal and 
helpful Dell Inspiron was finally beaten. I couldn't believe how slow my 
computer got, even worse than when I had to run simulations on MATLAB! First 
strike against Java :anger:

The second strike occurred when I tried to write a simple "Hello World" and I 
couldn't find where to do this. Me at 2013 didn't know a thing about IDE's nor 
about the enormous amount of info on the internet that could have helped me to
set up a proper development environment :neutral_face:

I didn't give Java another go because I got busy for almost one decade with my
job and then my masters degree. My previous jobs required me to use other 
languages, so I didn't have the need to revisit Java. Most of my former 
colleagues had a strong **bad** opinion about Java. As the least experienced
member in the teams, I would usually listen to the most senior engineers. 
As a result, I got polluted with this bias and I completely "forgot" about 
Java and my intentions to learn it. Or so I thought...

## Episode IV
Fast forward to July 2022 and my quest to get projects put Java back into the
table. An upcoming _possible_ work opportunity is lining up yet one decisive was
Java :boom: To say that I don't have any bias towards Java, would be a lie. So, 
I have decided to give Java one final go. I am confident that this time, the
attempt will be successful because of three key points:

- I have a more solid knowledge in setting up development environments
- A need for learning Java, hence a powerful driving force
- I'm leaving all biases aside

As a bonus, I decided to learn Java in my Linux laptop, and this has made
the learning process more rewarding.

### Resources used

Learning resources are almost _endless_ nowadays. There are just way too many
resources available, yet not all of them are actually good. After doing deep
research on the learning resources for Java, I came across the 
[Java Programming MOOC](https://java-programming.mooc.fi/) from the University 
of Helsinki. I skimmed through it and the contents and exercises looked quite 
good!

I'm using a small program called [Clockify](https://clockify.me/) to keep
track of the spent time on doing the course exercises and reading the material. 
In addition to this, I am posting my solutions in my GitHub 
[repo](https://github.com/mariel-rs/mooc_fi_java).

To keep me extra motivated and "wired" into the code, I have curated a list of 
nice radios into Rhythmbox. So far, in the last three days, I have completed one 
part of the course, out of 7. I'm feeling the bias is eroding and I'm starting 
to appreciate Java. I do find it a bit verbose and slower to type, yet it's not 
as bad as I thought it would be. 

Seems all the efforts are paying off. So far so good Java.

```java
public static void main(String[] args){
  System.out.println("Hello Java");
}
```