---
title: "Hello from Pop!_OS"
date: 2022-12-27
draft: false
author: "Mariel"
tags:
  - linux
  - Pop!_OS
  - en
image: /images/Pop_workspace.png
description: "First impressions of Pop!_OS"
toc: true
---

On Christmas Eve I decided try a new chicken recipe and Pop!_OS 22.04, an 
Ubuntu-based Linux distribution. The chicken was tasty and juicy that day and 
got even better the next day. However, Pop!_OS turned out even better than the 
dinner. Here are my thoughts and impressions of this distribution.

<!--more-->

## Background - Desperate times call for desperate measures

Thanks to the power of the "end of the year", I managed to clean my ASUS Zenbook 
and format it, such that I could split the SSD with a partition with Windows 10 
and another partition with Linux. This is a laptop I bought in 2019, and it 
proved its worth during my postgrad studies by handling a bloated Windows 10 
with many languages and tools I installed on the way - Python, Anaconda, Perl, 
R, C#, Node.js, MS SQL Server, PostgreSQL, Visual Studio 2017 and even Matlab! 
:zany_face:

My first attempt was to install Ubuntu MATE as I am more familiarized with the 
desktop and the commands. I tried to install Ubuntu MATE and later, the standard 
Ubuntu (with GNOME desktop) to no avail. The installer would take ages only to 
show the disk partitions and the available space in the hard drives. Sometimes 
it would take up to 40 minutes to do so. The full Ubuntu installation turned out 
badly thanks to the laptop NVIDIA GTX GPU. Despite Linux and GPU's have come a 
long way now, it wouldn't work. 

In an unplanned move, I looked for a Linux distribution that would be easy to 
set up and friendly enough handling my NVIDIA GPU. Many names came on the way, 
e.g. Manjaro, Linux Mint and many Arch-based distros. I still don't feel like 
exploring Arch-based distributions, and I don't particularly like Linux Mint
~~stupid prejudice~~. I was about to desist when I came across a distro I have 
never heard before: [Pop!_OS](https://pop.system76.com/)

## Pop_OS! for the win

The more I read about Pop!_OS, while waiting for Ubuntu installer to see the 
hard drives, the more interested I got into it. Many Reddit posts and blogs 
commended the NVIDIA GPU's support. Being an Ubuntu-based distribution, Pop!_OS 
inherits the easiness of its parent OS. I created a Live USB *ipso facto*. 

The installation process was a breeze compared to Ubuntu. The installer detected 
the hard drives almost immediately. I took my time to make the partitions 
properly. After 15 minutes, the installation was completed, and I took my first 
peek into it.

### Pros

I have been using Pop!_OS for about 4 days, and I am fascinated with it. Here is 
a non-exhaustive list of the features and perks I am loving about the distro:

- Booting time: 
Booting into Pop!_OS is extremely swift. I couldn't believe how "light-weight" 
the OS feels and how smart it looks. Despite that this distribution is 
Ubuntu-based, I feel it is a refined version of Ubuntu. Ubuntu MATE takes a 
long time to boot in my other machine, while Pop!_OS boots in a breeze.

- Window tiling: 
This has got to be one of the best perks of this distribution. I am used to 
doing manual tiling by using keyboard shortcuts all the time. However, with Pop, 
I don't need to put up a fight with the windows and the keyboard. Happy coding 
times :smile:

- NVIDIA support:
When I managed to install Ubuntu, it wouldn't boot thanks to a corrupted driver 
installation. This wasn't a problem with POP!_OS. The installation worked out 
of the box. It's quite nice to have a Linux OS running with a GPU, it's as if
my laptop has suddenly become extra beautiful :blush:

### Cons

It can't be all perfect, can it? 

- Lack of GRUB menu: 
I did have to configure a GRUB menu for making my life a tad easier and boot to 
Windows whenever I felt like doing so. It's a bit annoying that the GRUB menu 
default color is blue. Need to change that at some point.

- Installer options:
Something that Ubuntu excels at is the installer options. I took around 20
minutes understanding the partition requirements - root, swap, and an optional
home entry point. I did like the fact that the installer uses GParted, but I 
wish there was more guidance or at least a more intuitive option for less 
tech-savvy users.

- Sound issues: 
I came across a bug with the sound two days ago. I was playing some stuff on 
Rhythmbox. I needed to do something else, so I left the computer on. The 
computer went to suspension and when I returned, the computer wouldn't reproduce 
any audio. Turns out it's a known issue and even after following the tips on 
this [Reddit post](https://www.reddit.com/r/pop_os/comments/ug08v2/updated_to_2204_lts_popos_and_now_audio_will_not/) 
I couldn't make it work again. So I suspended the machine once again, and :boom: 
the issue is solved until today.

## Overall thoughts

The distribution feels like it's tailor-made for developers and people who don't 
want to see unnecessary "Start" menus nor spend an excessive amount of time 
setting up the system. The application launcher is slick and simple. The OS 
settings are also much simpler than in Ubuntu MATE.

I decided to use this OS for scientific computing programming as I am feeling 
_saudades_ of mathematical modelling. For now, I have Python, Julia, Hugo, 
VSCode and vim. I'm quite excited about that can be done in this setup!