---
title: "My dev environment"
date: 2022-08-04
draft: false
author: "Mariel"
tags:
  - geeking in
  - dev
  - en
image: /images/ubuntu_vscode.png
description: "How I set up my personal development environment"
toc: true
---

When I started my programming journey, I saw that each course / textbook / online 
class I browsed, they would have a suggested set of tools and stack. 
Even during my masters, the Python programming course organiser had a set of 
tools, which btw, were not my "cup of tea".
<!--more-->

In my first programming job, the development environment was not a set of
suggestions but a fixed set of tools and stack, for audit purposes. Windows 10,
Visual Studio 2017, Perforce, Notepad++ among other tools.

At first, I wondered why, and after all these years I understood it was for
consistency, people's preferences / previous experience with the tools plus the
"easy to use" factor. Considering my previous experience and comfort with the
tools, these the tools/stack I use in my personal computers.

## Windows

This development environment follows closely the guidelines of my first 
programming job (I got used to). I have to say that, despite that I have worked
with Windows for more than 10 years, I still struggle with dependencies and
dirty uninstalls/installs. However, this is how I started programming and I hold
it dear.

- Windows 10 Home
- VSCode for Python and my web stack (JavaScript, NodeJS, CSS, HTML). I once set 
it up to compile LaTeX documents and it was really cool!
- Visual Studio 2017 for C#
- Git
- Notepad++, as text editor
- VLC Media, for musical inspiration purposes :smile:

## Linux

This is my new learning adventure and so far, it has been a pleasant experience.

- Ubuntu Mate 20.04
- VSCode for Java and Python (so far)
- Git
- nqq, as text editor
- Rhythmbox, for musical inspiration purposes :smile:

I may try Vim one of these days, to understand the hype of it... yet VSCode
serves me very well!